README and docs reorg (#2226)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation: docs/manual-instrumentation.md

# Manual instrumentation

For most users, the out-of-the-box instrumentation is completely sufficient and nothing more has to
be done.  Sometimes, however, users wish to add attributes to the otherwise automatic spans,
or they might want to manually create spans for their own custom code.

## Contents

- [Manual instrumentation](#manual-instrumentation)
- [Dependencies](#dependencies)
  * [Maven](#maven)
  * [Gradle](#gradle)
- [Adding attributes to the current span](#adding-attributes-to-the-current-span)
- [Creating spans around methods with `@WithSpan`](#creating-spans-around-methods-with---withspan-)
  * [Suppressing `@WithSpan` instrumentation](#suppressing---withspan--instrumentation)
  * [Creating spans around methods with `otel.instrumentation.methods.include`](#creating-spans-around-methods-with-otelinstrumentationmethodsinclude)
- [Creating spans manually with a Tracer](#creating-spans-manually-with-a-tracer)

# Dependencies

> > :warning: starting with 0.6.0, and prior to version 1.0.0, `opentelemetry-javaagent-all.jar`

Reviewer: I think it's long enough ago now, safe to remove the "starting with"
```suggestion
> :warning: prior to version 1.0.0, `opentelemetry-javaagent-all.jar`
```

Author: If it's phrased "prior to version 1.0.0" and we hit 1.1 doesn't that mean that section isn't applicable any longer?   Maybe we should say "starting with 1.0.0", or did I completely misread it?

Author: Oh, nm, I misread it.  I'll take this suggestion.

use the `@WithSpan` annotation, also include the `opentelemetry-extension-annotations` dependency.

## Maven

```xml
  <dependencies>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
      <artifactId>opentelemetry-api</artifactId>
      <version>0.15.0</version>
    </dependency>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
      <artifactId>opentelemetry-extension-annotations</artifactId>
      <version>0.15.0</version>
    </dependency>
  </dependencies>
```

## Gradle

```groovy
dependencies {
    implementation('io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-api:0.15.0')
    implementation('io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-extension-annotations:0.15.0')
}
```

# Adding attributes to the current span

A common need when instrumenting an application is to capture additional application-specific or
business-specific information as additional attributes to an existing span from the automatic
instrumentation. Grab the current span with `Span.current()` and use the `setAttribute()`
methods:

```java
import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Span;

// ...

Span span = Span.current();
span.setAttribute(..., ...);
```

# Creating spans around methods with `@WithSpan`

> Another common situation is to capture a span around an existing first-party code method. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another common situation is to capture a span corresponding to one of your methods. The
```

## Creating spans around methods with otel.instrumentation.methods.include
This is a way to to create a span around a first-party code method without using `@WithSpan`.

| System property                 | Environment variable            | Purpose                                                                                                                                  |
|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| otel.instrumentation.methods.include |                                 | Add instrumentation for specific methods in lieu of `@WithSpan`.
Format is "my.package.MyClass1[method1,method2];my.package.MyClass2[method3]" |

# Creating spans manually with a Tracer

OpenTelemetry offers a tracer to easily enable custom instrumentation throughout your application.
See the [OpenTelemetry Java
QuickStart](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/master/QUICKSTART.md#tracing)
for an example of how to configure the tracer and use the Tracer, Scope and Span interfaces to

> instrument your application.

Reviewer: I think we want to recommend getting the tracer from GlobalOpenTelemetry (and not configuring the tracer)

Author: Ok, good call out.  I changed the wording in here to try and make this better and avoid suggesting the old way.

# Creating spans around methods with `@WithSpan`

Another common situation is to capture a span corresponding to one of your methods. The
`@WithSpan` annotation makes this straightforward:

```java
import io.opentelemetry.extension.annotations.WithSpan;

public class MyClass {
  @WithSpan
  public void MyLogic() {
      <...>
  }
}
```

Each time the application invokes the annotated method, it creates a span that denote its duration
and provides any thrown exceptions. Unless specified as an argument to the annotation, the span name
will be `<className>.<methodName>`.

## Suppressing `@WithSpan` instrumentation

Suppressing `@WithSpan` is useful if you have code that is over-instrumented using `@WithSpan`
and you want to suppress some of them without modifying the code.

| System property                 | Environment variable            | Purpose                                                                                                                                  |
|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | trace.annotated.methods.exclude | TRACE_ANNOTATED_METHODS_EXCLUDE | Suppress `@WithSpan` instrumentation for specific methods.

Reviewer 2: I think that this property has been changed a while ago to `otel.instrumentation.opentelemetry-annotations.exclude-methods`:

```suggestion
| otel.instrumentation.opentelemetry-annotations.exclude-methods | OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_OPENTELEMETRY_ANNOTATIONS_EXCLUDE_METHODS | Suppress `@WithSpan` instrumentation for specific methods.
```

Reviewer: I can confirm this very very long property name 😂.

I will accept the suggestion and merge the PR.

Thanks again @breedx-splk!
